Welcome to exercise number 23.
We're almost there.
And you'll notice that this house icon is highlighted
because if you click on that,
that's the same thing as this exercise,
which here is exercise numbers 22, mortgage calculator.
Okay, so I've switched it to a different currency.
I'm trying to be global in this course.
So we're looking at the Philippine peso in this case.
It doesn't matter what currency it is.
If you're dollar based,
just think of this as dollars, this exercise.
If you're yen based, yen, et cetera,
and you can get the idea.
If you wanna change your country and currency,
just click on here
or click on the settings.
Okay, let's get this started.
How does a mortgage work?
So like always for this course,
we only answer stuff in the white cells, okay?
And then the green is determined for us,
and then English is created here
to explain what happened there.
So let's enter in the stuff here, okay?
If you bought a house for 400,000 Philippine pesos, okay?
And you finance half of that with a mortgage.
So half that is, what, 200,000, right?
Okay, so I have to add in 200.
Okay.
Half of that with a mortgage
that had an interest rate of 5%.
Five.
And the life of the mortgage is 30 years,
then what would the size be of each of the monthly payments?
Thirty.
There you go,
and it tells you the answer here.
So it basically tells you that your monthly payments
will be 1074.
And play around with this, too, if you want, as well,
before you take on a mortgage
or before you think about buying a house
or before you get pre-approved for a mortgage, as well.
Okay, next question.
Number two.
Now, let's assume that we did not read the fine print
on question one,
the mortgage documents in question one, okay?
And the interest rate on our mortgage jumped
from five to 8%, okay?
That's a big jump.
Please calculate what our new monthly payment will be.
And for simplicity,
I said just assume that the length of the mortgage
is still 30 years
and we have not made a single payment yet.
Okay, so the mortgage size is still the same, 200,000.
The interest rate goes from five to eight,
and it's still 30 years.
Plug and play.
Easy, fun.
Okay, great.
So now it tells us that our payment will be that much, okay?
So how does that compare?
That's a lot higher.
That's, like, close to 40% higher.
Wow.
Isn't that crazy, dude?
So for a 3% increase from five to eight,
you're getting close to a 40% increase in payments.
So that 3% can be misleading.
Okay, number three.
Let's assume we got the exact same scenario as number one,
meaning 20,000,
$200,000, 30 years, at 5%.
One month after we sign the mortgage,
our broker called us
and said that interest rates dropped by 1%
and recommends that we refinance from 5% to 4%, okay?
Then the mortgage broker tells you
that he can do all the paperwork
and get you that 1% lower rate for a fee of $1000, okay?
So he's gonna charge a grand.
Should you do it or why?
And explain in details the new proposed mortgage
in the white boxes below.
Okay, so mortgage size is still 200,000.
Let's pretend we haven't made a payment yet.
The interest rate goes from five to four.
So before I enter that in,
we were paying 1074, okay.
Five to four.
And it's still, let's just say 30 years.
And he wants to charge 1000 bucks.
Okay, so if we refinanced it.
Before I look down there.
Then the monthly, the new payment would be 955, okay?
Versus that, that's about 125 or so higher, right?
And you're like, well, it's 1000 bucks.
You should definitely do it, okay?
You should definitely do it.
Because what happens is the difference of 125,
whatever it was,
will take you less than a year to break even
on the 1000 mortgage refinance fee.